Advantages:
1. Dependable:

The greatest advantage of the railway transport is that it is the most dependable mode of transport as it is the least affected by weather conditions such as rains, fog etc. compared to other modes of transport.

2. Better Organised:

ADVERTISEMENTS:

The rail transport is better organised than any other form of transport. It has fixed routes and schedules. Its service is more certain, uniform and regular as compared to other modes of transport.

3. High Speed over Long Distances:

Its speed over long distances is more than any other mode of transport, except airways. Thus, it is the best choice for long distance traffic.

4. Suitable for Bulky and Heavy Goods:

ADVERTISEMENTS:

Railway transport is economical, quicker and best suited for carrying heavy and bulky goods over long distances.

5. Cheaper Transport:

It is a cheaper mode of transport as compared to other modes of transport. Most of the working expenses of railways are in the nature of fixed costs. Every increase in the railway traffic is followed by a decrease in the average cost. Rail transport is economical in the use of labour also as one driver and one guard are sufficient to carry much more load than the motor transport.

6. Safety:

ADVERTISEMENTS:

Railway is the safest form of transport. The chances of accidents and breakdowns of railways are minimum as compared to other modes of transport. Moreover, the traffic can be protected from the exposure to sun, rains, snow etc.

7. Larger Capacity:

The carrying capacity of the railways is extremely large. Moreover, its capacity is elastic which can easily be increased by adding more wagons.

8. Public Welfare:

ADVERTISEMENTS:

It is the largest public undertaking in the country. Railways perform many public utility services. Their charges are based on ‘charge what the traffic can bear’ principle which helps the poor. In fact, it is national necessity.

9. Administrative Facilities of Government:

Railways provide administrative facilities to the Government. The defence forces and the public servants drive their mobility primarily from the railways.

10. Employment Opportunities:

ADVERTISEMENTS:

The railways provide greater employment opportunities for both skilled and unskilled labour. Over 16 lakh persons are depending upon railways for their livelihood.

Disadvantages:
Although railway transport has many advantages, it suffers from certain serious limitations:

1. Huge Capital Outlay:

The railway requires is large investment of capital. The cost of construction, maintenance and overhead expenses are very high as compared to other modes of transport. Moreover, the investments are specific and immobile. In case the traffic is not sufficient, the investments may mean wastage of huge resources.

2. Lack of Flexibility:

Another disadvantage of railway transport is its inflexibility. Its routes and timings cannot be adjusted to individual requirements.

3. Lack of Door to Door Service:

Rail transport cannot provide door to door service as it is tied to a particular track. Intermediate loading or unloading involves greater cost, more wear and tear and wastage of time.

The time and cost of terminal operations are a great disadvantage of rail transport.

4. Monopoly:

As railways require huge capital outlay, they may give rise to monopolies and work against public interest at large. Even if controlled and managed by the government, lack of competition may breed inefficiency and high costs.

5. Unsuitable for Short Distance and Small Loads:

Railway transport is unsuitable and uneconomical for short distance and small traffic of goods.

6. Booking Formalities:

ADVERTISEMENTS:

It involves much time and labour in booking and taking delivery of goods through railways as compared to motor transport.

7. No Rural Service:

Because of huge capital requirements and traffic, railways cannot be operated economically in rural areas. Thus, large rural areas have no railway service even today. This causes much inconvenience to the people living in rural areas.

8. Under-utilised Capacity:

ADVERTISEMENTS:

The railway must have full load for its ideal and economic operation. As it has a very large carrying capacity, under-utilisation of its capacity, in most of the regions, is a great financial problem and loss to the economy.

9. Centralised Administration:

Being the public utility service railways have monopoly position and as such there is centralised administration. Local authorities fail to meet the personal requirements of the people as compared to roadways.
